Best Practices for Safely Draining Kubernetes Nodes
Jun 2, 2025 | Kubernetes |     

Best Practices for Safely Draining Kubernetes Nodes


As cloud-native technologies continue to revolutionize application deployment and management, Kubernetes (K8s) stands out as a robust orchestrator for containerized applications. Among its many capabilities, node management is crucial for maintaining a healthy cluster, especially when it comes to safely draining nodes. This article outlines best practices for draining Kubernetes nodes, ensuring minimal disruption to your applications while optimizing resource utilization.

Understanding Node Draining
Draining a node means safely evicting all pods from it. This is usually necessary during maintenance, upgrades, or troubleshooting. When executed correctly, draining nodes can help maintain application availability and performance.

The Importance of Safely Draining Nodes
Minimizing Downtime: Properly draining nodes helps ensure that applications maintain high availability, reducing the risk of service interruptions.


Resource Optimization: Efficient pod relocation allows better utilization of cluster resources, which can lead to cost savings.


Operational Clarity: Following best practices for node draining helps teams maintain an organized approach to maintenance and upgrades.

Best Practices for Safely Draining Kubernetes Nodes
1. Use the Kubernetes Drain Command
The primary tool for draining nodes is the kubectl drain command. This command:

Evicts all pods from the node.
Requires all pods to be managed by a replica set, deployment, daemon set, or stateful set if they are to be rescheduled.

Make sure to run the command with the --ignore-daemonsets flag, since you typically don’t want to evict daemon sets when draining:

bash
kubectl drain –ignore-daemonsets –delete-local-data

2. Ensure Pod Disruptions Budgets are Configured
Pod Disruption Budgets (PDBs) allow you to specify the number of pods that can be unavailable during voluntary disruptions (including draining). Always configure PDBs to ensure that your applications remain resilient during node drainage.

Example:

yaml
apiVersion: policy/v1beta1
kind: PodDisruptionBudget
metadata:
name: my-app-pdb
spec:
minAvailable: 2
selector:
matchLabels:
app: my-app

3. Monitor Workloads and Scaling
Before initiating a drain, monitor workloads on the node to assess whether it’s an appropriate time for draining. Analyze pod health, scalability settings, and the overall load on the node. If workloads are unbalanced, consider manually scaling deployments or services to ensure adequate coverage.

4. Schedule Maintenance Windows
Plan and communicate maintenance windows during off-peak hours to drain nodes. This approach reduces the risk of impacting critical services and offers a greater assurance that resources will be available to handle demand.

5. Use Graceful Termination
Always ensure that pods have adequate termination grace periods specified. This allows applications to complete ongoing requests and handle connections smoothly before termination.

Update your deployment manifest to specify a reasonable grace period:

yaml
spec:
terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 30

6. Validate Pod Rescheduling
After executing the drain command, validate that all pods have been successfully rescheduled to other nodes. You can use the following command to check the status of your pods:

bash
kubectl get pods –all-namespaces -o wide

Look for pods that are still in the “Pending” state and troubleshoot as necessary.

7. Drain in a Controlled Manner
If your cluster is large, consider draining nodes in a controlled, sequential manner rather than all at once. This strategy helps prevent resource exhaustion and bottlenecks during the drain process.

8. Automate with Scripts and CI/CD Pipelines
For frequent operations, consider automating the drain process using scripts or CI/CD pipelines. This can help ensure that best practices are consistently followed while streamlining maintenance workflows.

9. Test Your Drain Strategy
Just as any other critical operation, testing your drain strategy in a staging environment is crucial. Knowing the impact of draining nodes under various scenarios prepares you for real-world situations.

Conclusion
Draining Kubernetes nodes safely is an essential skill for any DevOps or SRE team leveraging Kubernetes for application management. By following these best practices, teams can minimize disruptions, enhance service reliability, and ensure a smoother operational experience.

As technology continues to evolve, maintaining an updated understanding of Kubernetes’ capabilities and best practices will lead to greater efficiency in managing containerized applications. For more insights and best practices, stay tuned to the WafaTech Blog—your resource for all things tech!